.EN
.TH C4.5 1
.SH NAME
.PP
consultr \- classify items using a rule set
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
.B consultr
[ \fB-f\fR FNS ]
[ \fB-t\fR ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I Consultr
reads a rule set produced by c4.5rules and
uses this to classify items whose description
is provided by the user.
The rule set read is
.I filestem.rules,
where
.I filestem
is the file name stem (see manual entry for c4.5).
.PP
Consultr prompts for the value of an attribute when needed.
Unknown attribute values are specified as '?'.
.PP
If the attribute has discrete values, its value
can be specified either as
.ti 8
.I v
.br
where v is one of the permissible values of the attribute, or as
.ti 8
.I "v1:p1, v2:p2, ... , vn:pn"
.br
where the vi's are some or all of the permissible values of the
attribute and the pi's are corresponding probabilities.
If the sum of the pi's is less than 1, the remaining probability
is distributed equally among the unspecified values of the
attribute.  For example, if attribute A has possible values
X, Y and Z, the reply
.ti 8
X:0.5
.br
is the same as
.ti 8
X:0.5, Y:0.25, Z:0.25
.PP
If the attribute has real values, its value can be
specified either as
.ti 8
.I r
.br
where r is a real number, or as
.ti 8
.I r1 - r2
.br
where r1 and r2 are real numbers.  The latter form is
taken to mean "somewhere in the interval [r1,r2]".
.PP
When all relevant attributes have been determined,
consultr will give a class that the item might
belong to.  The likelihood of the class may be
indicated by a probability.  For example,
.ti 8
.I "C1  CF = 0.9"
.br
means "class C1 with probability 0.9".
.PP
At the end of each item, consultr will prompt for
retrial of the same item, a new item, or end of session.
When retrying an item, the previous values of queried
attributes are displayed in square brackets.  If the
value is unchanged, reply with a carriage return;
otherwise, specify the changed value.
.PP
Options and their meanings are:
.PP
.TP 12
.BI \-f filestem\^
Specify the filename stem (default
.B DF)
.TP
.B \-t
Display the rule set at the start of the consulting
session.
.SH FILES
.PP
.in 8
consultr
.br
filestem.names
.br
filestem.rules
.in 0
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
c4.5(1), c4.5rules(1)
.PP
.SH BUGS
